---
paper_id: PAP-sutter2017economic
doi: 10.21036/ltpub101050
source: unpaywall_html
fetch_date: 2026-02-18
word_count: 1621
has_references: False
---

How Are Economic Preferences Formed in Early Life and Adolescence? Left Arrow Matthias Sutter How Are Economic Preferences Formed in Early Life and Adolescence? Matthias Sutter Abstract information Economic preferences that relate to time (patience), risk taking and social interaction have been shown to play an important role in life success. In this video, MATTHIAS SUTTER explores how these economic preferences are formed in early life and adolescence. Carrying out economic experiments and collecting survey data among 500 families in rural Bangladesh, Sutter finds that children adopt almost entirely the economic preferences of their parents. Sutter also shows that factors like higher income and coming from a larger household can help to form these economic preferences in a more advantageous manner. Highlighting that genetics alone cannot explain differences in economic preferences, Sutter’s work provides important information for governments seeking to intervene to improve life chances. Show more DOI: https://doi.org/10.21036/LTPUB101050 Researcher Professor Matthias Sutter is a Director of the Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods in Bonn. Holding professorships in Economics at the Universities of Cologne and Innsbruck, Sutter is also a research affiliate of the Reinhart Selten Institute (RSI) and a research fellow of the IZA. Having previously worked at the University of Gothenburg and the European University Institute, Sutter’s research focuses on experimental economics. An editor of numerous journals including Management Science and the European Economic Review and a member of the Scientific Board of the Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Sutter’s book "Die Entdeckung der Geduld" has been published in two editions (2014; 2018), was a bestseller in Austria and has been translated into Turkish (2017) and Mandarin Chinese (2016). Institution information Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods Initially founded as a Max Planck institute that investigates the provision of collective goods, the ­institute has developed into an international hub that focuses in its research mainly on applied economics and on behavioral law. Moreover, the institute hosts three independent research groups on “moral courage”, “economic cognition”, and “mechanisms of normative change”. The set of researchers from various disciplines, such as economics, law, psychology, and sociology, constitutes a truly interdisciplinary environment that facilitates a cross-fertilization of ideas. Show more Original Publication Economic preferences across generations and family clusters: A large-scale experiment Shyamal Chowdhury, Matthias Sutter, Klaus F. Zimmermann Published in 2020 Citation Matthias Sutter, Latest Thinking, How Are Economic Preferences Formed in Early Life and Adolescence?, https://doi.org/10.21036/LTPUB101050, 2020 Copied Credits: © Matthias Sutter and Latest Thinking This work is licensed under CC-BY 4.0 Suggested Videos Left Arrow Right Arrow Playlist How Could the Modern Human Succeed over Other Hominids? Jean-Jacques Hublin What Does Dental Calculus Reveal About Human Evolution? Christina Warinner What Can We Learn from Studying Homo sapiens’ First Moves into Tropical Forests? Patrick Roberts Are Europeans Today Genetically Different from Their Ancestors? Johannes Krause What New Insights Can Archeology Provide Into Homo sapiens’ Emergence from Africa? Michael Petraglia What Are the Basic Principles that Govern Synaptic Plasticity? Alessio Attardo Which Evolutionary Changes in the Genome Led to the Development of the Large-Sized Human Brain? Wieland B. Huttner How Does the Presence of FLRT Proteins Influence Cortex Folding? Rüdiger Klein Is Language Development in the Child’s Brain Visible on a Molecular Level? Angela D. Friederici Can Autism Be Explained by Biological Causes and Hence Be Treated Medically? Nils Brose How Do Cells Form Compartments and How Is this Related to the Onset of Neurodegenerative Diseases? Anthony A. Hyman Which Cognitive Process Is Used to Adapt Decision Making to Different Contexts? Andreas Glöckner Which Neural Mechanisms Are Taking Place During Social Interaction of Individuals? Leonhard Schilbach How Does Making Music Change the Brain Depending on the Starting Age? Eckart Altenmüller How Can Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Help Us to Diagnose and Treat Neurodegenerative Disease? Nikolaus Weiskopf How Do Behavioral Context and Internal State Influence Sensory Perception and Behavior? Ilona Grunwald Kadow How Is Cross-Talk Between Calcium and Actin Cytoskeleton Involved in Memory Formation? Marina Mikhaylova How Is the Cerebral Cortex of Mammalian Brains Wired? Moritz Helmstaedter How Can We Redefine Natural Hazards Through Societal and Health Responses? Kelley De Polt How Can We Explain Extreme Rainfall in a Warming Climate? Sarosh Alam Ghausi How Can AI Improve Early Warnings for Climate Risks? Markus Reichstein To What Extent Do Aerosol Particles in the Atmosphere Mask the Effects of Greenhouse Gases? Bjorn B. Stevens What is the Impact of Aerosol Particles on Cloud Formation? Meinrat Andreae What are the Sources and Health Effects of Air Pollution? Jos Lelieveld How Do Climate Change Related Natural Disasters Potentially Increase the Risk of Armed Conflicts? Jonathan Donges Do Land Management Changes Have Effects on Climate as Large as Land Cover Changes? Julia Pongratz What Is the Role of the Eurasian Forests Under a Warming Climate? Martin Heimann When Will Arctic Sea Ice Be Gone? Dirk Notz What Happens to Carbon Dioxide in Plant and Soil Systems? Susan Trumbore How Is the Concept of “Storyline” Being Employed in Climate Related Science? Eulalia Baulenas How Can Artificial Intelligence Enhance Our Understanding of the Earth System? Markus Reichstein How are Purchasing Decisions Impacted by the Compromise Effect? Marko Sarstedt What Is the Economic Relevance of Human Indecisiveness? Georg Weizsäcker How Does Empathy Affect Trade-Offs People Are Willing to Make Between Their Own and Other’s Income? Justin Valasek Which Character Traits Are Important for Good Decision-Making? Joachim Funke Does Logically Incoherent Decision-Making Really Have Negative Consequences? Gerd Gigerenzer Is Random Decision Making a Viable Solution for Replacing or Complementing Contemporary Selection and Election Processes? Bruno S. Frey Why Do Decision Makers Reciprocate to Gifts? Klaus M. Schmidt Which Cognitive Process Is Used to Adapt Decision Making to Different Contexts? Andreas Glöckner Do Moral Capacities Change With Improving Living Conditions? Christian Welzel Can We Explain the Co-Evolution of Democracy and Market Economy by Adaptive Preferences? Carl Christian von Weizsäcker What Are the Core Mechanisms that Drive the Dynamics of Political Discourse? Philip Leifeld Is Political Competition Good for Social Welfare? Felix Bierbrauer Is Random Decision Making a Viable Solution for Replacing or Complementing Contemporary Selection and Election Processes? Bruno S. Frey Is There a Relationship Between Anti-Trust Law, Economic Growth, and Democratic Development? Niels Petersen How Is Nostalgia Felt in Post-Socialist Hungary? Chris Hann How Did Radio Broadcasting Affect Public Support for the Nazis in Pre-War Germany? Maja Adena What is the Importance of Context in Entrepreneurship Research? Friederike Welter How Can an Entrepreneurial Mindset be Developed to Encourage Poverty Reduction? Michael Frese What Impact do Start-Ups Really Have on Regional or National Economic Development? Michael Fritsch Are Europeans Today Genetically Different from Their Ancestors? Johannes Krause Where Does the EU’s Acceptance Problem Come from and How Can It Be Counteracted? Dieter Grimm Is It a Violation of the Right to Leave to Prevent Migrants from Crossing the Border to Another State? Nora Markard Is There Actually a Continental Divide Between Europe and Asia? Chris Hann How Were Different Actor Groups Intertwined During the 2015 Refugee Crisis? Ludger Pries How Does Medieval Historians' Use of the Notion of 'Europe' Compare to Its Use in the Middle Ages? Klaus Oschema How Does the Enzyme MOF Work as a Molecular Bridge between Epigenetics and Metabolism? Asifa Akhtar Why Are Some Genetically Caused Diseases so Frequent in the Human Population? Tobias Lenz How Are Different Transcripts in Our Genome Translated Into Proteins? Uwe Ohler How Is Genetic Variance Maintained Through Sexual Selection? Astrid T. Groot Are Europeans Today Genetically Different from Their Ancestors? Johannes Krause Do New Genes Stem From the Non-Coding Part of the Genome During Fast Adaptation Processes? Diethard Tautz How Does the Interplay of Genes, Environment, and Development Affect the Biological Diversity of a Species? Ralf Sommer Which Evolutionary Changes in the Genome Led to the Development of the Large-Sized Human Brain? Wieland B. Huttner To Which Extent Do Genetics Determine the Composition of the Gut Microbiome? Ruth E. Ley Which Functions Do the Noncoding Parts of Human RNA Have in Metastasis Formation of Lung Cancer Cells? Sven Diederichs Does Compulsory Licensing Work as an Effective Antitrust Tool? Monika Schnitzer Does the Instrument of Opposition During the Patent Filing Process Need to Be Improved? Dietmar Harhoff How Can Spintronic Devices Be Built to Improve Computing Capacity? Stuart Parkin How Can Plasma and Proton Beams Be Used in Building Next Generation Particle Accelerators? Allen Caldwell How Can the Characteristics of Continuum Robots Be Optimized for a Specific Medical Application? Jessica Burgner-Kahrs How Can the Data Economy Be Regulated to Promote New Emerging Markets? Josef Drexl How Is Economic Change Influenced by Innovations? Uwe Cantner How Can an Entrepreneurial Mindset be Developed to Encourage Poverty Reduction? Michael Frese How Can German Constitutional Law Promote the Inclusion of Migrants? Anuscheh Farahat How Were Different Actor Groups Intertwined During the 2015 Refugee Crisis? Ludger Pries How Does DNA Testing Affect Family Reunifications in the Immigration Process? Torsten Heinemann Is There a Religious Bias Against Muslim Immigrants? Marc Helbling How Do Moroccans Residing in Different Countries Perceive the Modernized Family Code? Marie-Claire Foblets Is It a Violation of the Right to Leave to Prevent Migrants from Crossing the Border to Another State? Nora Markard How Has the Islamic Party of Malaysia’s Stance Towards Popular Culture Evolved? Dominik Müller Did Religion Play a Causal Role in the Evolution of Large, Complex Societies? Russell Gray How Is Yoga Spirituality Transforming in the Face of Modernity? Anne Koch How Is the Principle of the Best Interests of the Child Applied in Islamic Family Law? Nadjma Yassari Is There a Religious Bias Against Muslim Immigrants? Marc Helbling What Are the Effects of Religious Pluralism in Society on Individual Religiosity? Detlef Pollack Is Confucianism a Religion or a Secular Moral System? Peter van der Veer